---
title: 'Random Walk and Catalan Numbers'
date: 2022-12-15
permalink: /posts/2022/12/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - stochastic processes
  - combinatorial math
---

Discrete random walk is a vital model in stochastic processes, especially when studying Markov chains. One important topic to research about random walks is their transience and recurrence. Here we build the model. 

## Model Construction

The simplest version comes as follows. 

Suppose a man is walking on a long street $L$, with positions in the set $\mathcal{P}\subset\mathbb{Z}$. The man starts from position $X_0=0$, moving one step each time, whose position at discrete period $i\in \mathbb{R}^{+}$ is a random variable $X_i$. 

Mathematically, $\lvert X_i-X_{i-1}\rvert = 1$ and $X_i-X_{i-1} = 1$ with probability $p<1$ in general, $\forall i\geq 1$. 

His movements are also based on some other rules for more complex versions.

The list of other symbols applied in this post:

| Symbol  |      Definition     |  Meaning  |
|----------|:-------------:|------:|
| $P_{ij}^{(n)}$ |  $P(X_n=j$ \| $X_0=i)$ | Starting from $i$, the probability of arriving $j$ after $n$ times.  |
|$\tau_i$        |  $\inf$\{ $n\geq1$ \| $X_n=i$\} | First time arrival at state $i$.
| $f_{ij}^{(n)}$ |   $P(\tau_j=n$ \| $X_0=i)$    |   The probability of first arrival $j$ at time $n$, starting from $i$. |
|  $m_i$   |    $\mathbb{E}[\tau_i$ \| $X_0=i]$ | Mean recurrent time of state $i$.
| $C_k$ | -- |    The $k^{th}$ Catalan number. |

## Catalan Numbers

### Definition and Basic Expression

In [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalan_number), Catalan numbers are described as "a sequence of natural numbers that occur in various counting problems often involving recursively defined objects".

The basic expression formula:
$$C_{n} = \frac{1}{n+1}\binom{2n}{n} = \binom{2n}{n}  - \binom{2n}{n+1}. $$

We are pleased to connect some computations with the Catalan number since it has many good properties.

### Some Advanced Formulas
#### Segner's Recurrence Relation 
$$C_0 = 1 \quad \text{and} \quad  C_{n+1} = \sum_{0}^{n}C_iC_{n-i}.$$

#### Generating Function
$$ c(x) = \sum _{0}^{\infty}C_{n}x^n = \frac{1-\sqrt{1-4x}}{2x}.$$

## Transience and Recurrence

 Typically there are two common ways to do the analyses at the origin (since all. states communicate, reduced to $0$):
- Check the convergence of $\sum\limits_{i=1}^{\infty}P(X_i=0$ \| $X_0=0) = \sum\limits_{i=1}^{\infty}P_{00}^{(i)}$ 
- Directly compute the probability of re-entering state $0$, i.e.,  $P(\tau_0<\infty$ \| $X_0=0) = \sum\limits_{i=1}^{\infty}f_{00}^{(n)}$.

In many teaching materials, they use the first one to analyze the conventional two-sided symmetric random walks. In contrast, observation shows that direct computation also works by connecting to the concept of **Catalan numbers** in combinatorial math.

###  The Basic Symmetric Random Walk
Firstly, it is easy to obtain that $P_{00}^{(2n+1)} = 0 = f_{00}^{(2n+1)}$, due to the structure of random-walk Markov chain, $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}$.

Now consider the definition of $f_{00}^{(2n)}$, we could simply regard every case of it as one arrangement of $+1$ and $-1$, total $n$ of each, with the requirement that the first $k$ sum $s_k$ always keep the same sign, except for the last $s_{2n}$.

The above transformation reminds us of the definition of **Catalan number** in combinatorics $C_{n}$, along with the symmetric property, we get $$f_{00}^{(2n)} = 2C_{n-1}p^n(1-p)^n, \forall n \in \mathbb{N}^{+}.$$

Some detailed explanations:
- By changing all the signs, we get the symmetric case.
- Only consider $>0$ cases:
	- The first one must be $1$, while the last one $-1$.
	- Arrange the remnants with $s_k \geq 0$.
	- It is a bijection. 

Now the question is reduced to checking the value $P(\tau_0<\infty$ \| $X_0=0)$, which is 
$$\sum_{1}^{\infty}2C_{n-1}(p-p^2)^n = 1 - \sqrt{1-4p(1-p)}.$$
It is clear that
- when $p = 1/2$, $P(\tau_0<\infty$ \| $X_0=0) = 1$, recurrent state $0$.
- when $p \neq 1/2$, $P(\tau_0<\infty$ \| $X_0=0) < 1$, transient state $0$.

A good property is that the method can help judge whether the state is positive or null recurrent.

Check (only $p = 1/2$) $$m_0 = \sum_{1}^{\infty}\frac{2nC_{n-1}}{4^n}  = \frac{1}{2}\sum_{0}^{\infty}\binom{2n}{n}\frac{1}{4^n} \geq \frac{1}{2}\sum_{0}^{\infty}\frac{1}{2n+1} = \infty.$$

Therefore, all states are null recurrent when $p = 1/2$.

###  A Reflected Random Walk
Now let us consider a slightly more complicated case, to exhibit the validity of the idea.

Suppose the case becomes 
$$W_{n+1} = \mathbf{1}_{\{W_n>0\}}(W_n + A_n) + \mathbf{1}_{\{W_n=0\}}, \quad \forall n\in \mathbb{N},$$
where $A_n$ has probability $p$ to be $1$, and $q = 1-p$ to its opposite number.

Intuitively speaking, every time the person arrives at state $0$, he will directly move to state $1$ next time. Namely, we lose the negative part of the road $L$.

We still consider the value $f_{11}^{(2n)}$, because state $1$ is more special here. Similar to the idea above, one different case is when $n = 1$, we have double sides. So the value $f_{11}^{(2n)}$ becomes:
- $q+ pq$, when $n=1$;
- $C_{n-1}p^nq^n$, when $n>1$ (single side).

Hence, for the probability $P(\tau_1<\infty$\| $X_0=1)$, we have $$\sum_{1}^{\infty}f_{11}^{(2k)} = 2\left(1 - \max\left\{\frac{1}{2}, p\right\}\right).$$

It is explicit to see that
- when $p \leq 1/2$, recurrent states;
- when $p > 1/2$, transient states.
